# Homework 2

## Instructions
Your solutions should be in form of a report in `.md` format. Make sure to document
you procedure properly. In the beginning of the assignment, you will be working
with Git & Github, for this part, you do not have to document what you have
done but we will check if it has been done. When you are finished push you results to Github and raise an issue,
just as you have done in previous homework. To pass the homework you will have to 
complete the assigments below and also finish the peer-review.

Feel free to contact me if anything is unclear.
## Setting up the repo 

From [homework 1](/homework/1) you should already have your repository set up. To
begin with, create a `.gitignore` file in the root of you repository. Make sure that
you ignore files that are unnecessary to the homework. Now, create a new branch, name it
something along the lines of `homework_2` or `hw2`. Remember to use `_` instead of spaces between words.
All new changes, should be made in this branch.

**After you are finished with the homework, merge the new branch to the main
branch.** We will only evaluate the main branch. We will also check to see that
you have created a branch, this is part of the assignment. 

## Working with tables
The data for the assigments below can be found in the following [repository](https://github.com/mt4007-ht23/data)
on the Github organization.

### Apartment Prices
The data found in `Booli_sold.csv` contains data on sales of apartments in Ekhagen
(next to Lappis). Download this file and read it into your code. Note that the
data file is of type `.csv`. If you run in to some issue whilst reading in the data, use Google!

#### Your task is to 
1. Calculate the price per square meter (ppsqm) for each apartment sold. That is, add a
  new variable to your table containing the data representing the ppsqm.
2. Rank the top 5 most expensive appartments w.r.t ppsqm? Present this in a
  table. Hint: Use a sort function.
3. What is the avereage ppsqm in Ekhagen?
4. Highlight an aspect of the data that you find interesting. Explain you
   choice.

### The Swedish Election of 2018
The data found in `2018_R_per_kommun.csv` contains data on voting in the 2018
Swedish election. Your job is to analyize the data by completeing the tasks below.

Note that csv files can have different *seperators*, *delimeters*
and *decimal signs*. Take this into account when you are reading in this dataset. Your

#### Your task is to 
1. Calculate the total number of legitimate votes (Giltiga Röster) in Stockholm
   during the election. That is, sum upp the number of legitimate votes for all municipalities (kommun) in
   Stockholm.
2. In which municipality did the social democratic party (Social demokraterna, S) garner the
   hightest voting percentage?
3. Rank the (3) municipialities with highest participation (valdeltagande). Present this in
   the form of a table.



