# Homework 4

## Instructions

In this assigment, the task is to analyse the number of cell phones in countries
and how they relate to population size. The data is fraught with missing values
and spread out into different files. Your task is to clean, combine and present
the data.  

Make sure of the following:
- Your solutions should be in form of a report in .md format.
- You have documented your procedure properly. 
- Your answers are clear and concise.

When you are finished push you results to Github and **raise an issue**, just as you
have done in previous homeworks. To pass the homework you will have to complete
the assigments below and also finish the [peer-review](/homework/#peer-review).

Feel free to contact me if anything is unclear.

## Data Preparation
### Cleaning data 

To begin with, take a look a the `cell_phones_total.csv` file. It contains data
about the number of phones withtin countries over the years, from 1960-2019. You
will find that some numbers are represented as string, where *k=1e3*, *M=1e6*
and *B=1e9*. The dataset also contains missing values. Clean the
dataset. Make sure to: 

- Deal with missing values. Fill and/or remove missing values.
- Convert all the *relevant* cells to numbers (not strings).

Each step has to be documented.

When you are finished preparing the data present a table of the following
format: It does not have to exactly match but **all the missing values should be
handled**. Here I have sorted the values by the year 2015.

| iso-3   |     2015 |     2016 |     2017 |     2018 |       2019 |
|:--------|---------:|---------:|---------:|---------:|-----------:|
| CHN     | 1.29e+09 | 1.36e+09 | 1.47e+09 | 1.65e+09 |   1.73e+09 |
| IND     | 1e+09    | 1.13e+09 | 1.17e+09 | 1.18e+09 |   1.15e+09 |
| USA     | 3.82e+08 | 3.96e+08 | 4e+08    | 4.22e+08 | nan        |
| IDN     | 3.39e+08 | 3.86e+08 | 4.35e+08 | 3.19e+08 |   3.45e+08 |
| BRA     | 2.58e+08 | 2.44e+08 | 2.18e+08 | 2.07e+08 | nan        |

*Hint: All the missing values should no be treated equally.*

## Combining Data 

Now that we have cleaned our cell phones data, we want to analyse the number of
cell phones per capita. To make this possible, we need to expand our original dataset.
The file `pop_data.csv` contains data about the population size of countries
over years. Once again there will be missing values. Deal with them before
proceeding. 

To combine the cell phone data with the population data, we need to reshape
both datasets. This can be done by pivotting the tables into the right format.
Remember the *3* rules from the [previous
lecture](/lectures/5#structuring-the-data). Present a similar table to below the
one below.

| iso-3   |   year |   n_cellphones |      population |
|:--------|-------:|---------------:|----------------:|
| ABW     |   1960 |              0 | 54608           |
| AFG     |   1960 |              0 |     8.62247e+06 |
| AGO     |   1960 |              0 |     5.3572e+06  |
| ALB     |   1960 |              0 |     1.6088e+06  |
| AND     |   1960 |              0 |  9443           |

The iso-3 format is nice to work with but for presentation it is better to work
with real names of the countries. A mapping between iso-3 and country name can
be found in the `country_data.csv` file.

Combine the cell phone, population and country data into a single table. Present
a similar table to below. Here, the coutries are the ones with highest number of
cell phones per capita in 2019. 

|   year |   Macao |   Hong Kong |   United Arab Emirates |   Antigua and Barbuda |   Seychelles |
|-------:|--------:|------------:|-----------------------:|----------------------:|-------------:|
|   2015 | 3.08823 |     2.2904  |                2.00742 |               1.95684 |      1.58426 |
|   2016 | 3.14351 |     2.39893 |                2.21252 |               1.98754 |      1.60546 |
|   2017 | 3.2101  |     2.48877 |                2.18343 |               2.01934 |      1.74243 |
|   2018 | 3.34874 |     2.67021 |                2.19908 |               2.00816 |      1.8499  |
|   2019 | 3.28485 |     2.86365 |                2.12774 |               1.99746 |      1.9872  |

Analyse the country with highest growth rate in the last 5 years. That is,
create a plot that illustrates the growth rate of the countries in the table
above over the last 10 years.

*Hint: You can pivot the tables to get the desired output.*
