# Homework 5

## Instructions

In this assigment, you will practice your skills in both SQL and Regex. The
scenario involves user activity logs and user comments. The goal is to perform
data analysis tasks using SQL queries and extract relevant information from user
comments using Regex.

Make sure of the following:
- Your solutions should be in form of a report in .md format.
- You have documented your procedure properly. 
- Your answers are clear and concise.

When you are finished push you results to Github and **raise an issue**, just as you
have done in previous homeworks. To pass the homework you will have to complete
the assigments below and also finish the [peer-review](/homework/#peer-review).

Feel free to contact me if anything is unclear.


## SQL

The file `user_actions.db` in the data repo contains an SQLite database. In the database there is a table
named `user_actions`. Analyse the table and solve the following tasks.

- Retrieve the usernames of all users who have performed the "signup" action.
- Find the total number of log entries for each user. Display the user_id,
  username, and the count of log entries.
- Identify users who have both logged in (action = 'login') and signed up
  (action = 'signup') on the same day. Display the user_id and username.

Each task should be solved **only** using SQL. 

## Regex

The file `comments.txt` in the data repo contains lines of text, each
representing a user comment. Users sometimes include tags in their comments
using the format "#tag". Analyse the file and solve the following tasks.

- Write a regular expression to extract all hashtags from a given comment. For
  example, applying the regex to comment 1 should return ["#programming",
  "#tips"].
- Create a regular expression to find comments that mention both "#programming"
  and "#python". Apply the regex to comment 2 and check if it matches.
- Using your regular expression, extract all unique hashtags from the entire
  text file. (*)

The last task is optional (*)! 

Each task should be solved **only** using regex.

Good Luck!


