# Lecture 10 (Web Scraping)

### Resources

- [Web Scraping with R](https://r4ds.hadley.nz/webscraping)
- [Web Scraping with Python](https://realpython.com/python-web-scraping-practical-introduction/)

*You can find examples and motivation in the resources.*

## Summary

In this lecture, we will continue to study techniques for retrieving data from
the internet. Specifcally, we will look at web scraping. We have looked at how
REST APIs work and how we can retrieve resources from them. However, in many
cases data will not be available through an API and we therefore need to turn to
web scraping, a method for retrieving data that is visible on a website.

## Web Scraping

Web scraping is the process of extracting data from websites. It involves
accessing and collecting information present in the HTML code of a webpage. This
technique provides a powerful means to gather data for analysis and research.

By scraping websites, we can retrieve information that is available on websites
but that do not have APIs open to the public. Furthermore, we can stay updated
with real-time information. This is particularly useful for tracking dynamic
data that changes frequently. For instance, weather data, stock market data as
so on.

### How to Webscrape

To efficiently perfrom web scraping an understanding of HTML is important. 

#### HTML 

HTML, or HyperText Markup Language, serves as the backbone of the internet by
providing a standardized structure for creating and presenting content on
webpages. At its core, HTML is a markup language that uses tags to define the
structure and elements within a document. Tags encapsulate different content
elements, such as headings, paragraphs, links, images, and more. Understanding
HTML is important for effective web scraping because it allows practitioners to
navigate the structure of a webpage and precisely target the data they seek. By
understanding the hierarchy of HTML elements and their attributes, web scrapers can
programmatically access and extract relevant information. 

Read more about HTML [here](https://www.w3schools.com/html/)

#### Static vs Dynamic

Websites can be categorized as either static or dynamic. A static website
consists of fixed content that remains unchanged until manually updated, making
data extraction relatively straightforward using techniques like HTML parsing.
On the other hand, dynamic websites use technologies like JavaScript to load
content dynamically, altering the page after initial load. While static sites
may be scraped using simple HTML parsing, dynamic sites often require tools like
headless browsers (e.g., Selenium) to simulate user interactions and access
dynamically rendered content. 

In terms of REST, for static websites, we retrieve the complete website when
making a request to the server. In contrast, dynamic websites retrieve the
skeleton of the website and fills in the data using e.g JavaScript after the
fact. Since, we are only retrieving the skeleton of the website when making a
request, there is nothing to scrape, therefore the need for tool like
headless browsers to fill in the data before scraping.

In general, it is a bit more difficult to scrape dynamically rendered websites,
but not by much. The point is that we should be aware of the type of website
being scraped and use the relevant tools for the job.

### Ethical Considerations

While web scraping opens doors to a wealth of information, it's crucial to
approach it ethically. Here are some considerations:

- Always adhere to the terms of service of the website you are scraping. Some
websites explicitly prohibit scraping in their terms.

- To prevent server overload, implement rate limiting in your scraping scripts.
  This ensures you're not making too many requests in a short period, respecting
  the server's capacity.

- Robots.txt files provide guidelines for web crawlers. Check for this file on a
  website to understand any restrictions or rules set by the website owner.

## Example

To make web scraping more concrete, let's create a simple web scraper.

In the following website:

https://www.worldometers.info/world-population/population-by-country/

we can retrieve some some meta-data about countries around the world. The goal
is to create a dataframe of the data in the website. We should begin by
analysing the website. Right-click on the website and select `inspect`, this may
differ between web-browsers. Now, we can interactively anaylse the content(HTML)
of the website. For this particular website, we see that the data is in the form
of a table. So let's look for a `<table>...</table>` tag. We can see that the
data is under the table with `id="example2"`. From `<thead>...</thead>`, we get
the variable names in the `<th>...</th>` tags and from `<tbody>...</tbody>` we
get the data in the `<tr>...</tr>` tags. 

Using this, let's write some code.

The following code scrapes the website and creates a dataframe of the data:

:::code-group
```Python
import pandas as pd
import requests 
from bs4 import BeautifulSoup 
  
URL = "https://www.worldometers.info/world-population/population-by-country/"
r = requests.get(URL) 
  
html = BeautifulSoup(r.content) # If this line causes an error, run 'pip install html5lib' or install html5lib 
table = html.find("table", id="example2")

thead = table.find("thead")
tbody = table.find("tbody")

columns = []
for th in thead.find_all("th"):
    columns.append(th.text)

data = []
for tr in tbody.find_all("tr"):
    data.append(
        [td.text for td in tr.find_all("td")]
    )

df = pd.DataFrame(data, columns=columns)
# Or even more simply
#df = pd.read_html(str(table))[0] 
```

```R
library(tidyverse)
library(rvest)

URL <- "https://www.worldometers.info/world-population/population-by-country/"
html <- read_html(URL)
table <- html %>% html_elements("#example2")

thead <- table %>% html_element("thead")
tbody <- table %>% html_element("tbody")

columns <- list()
for (th in thead %>% html_elements("th")){
    columns <- append(columns, th %>% html_text2())
}

df <- data.frame()

for (tr in tbody %>% html_elements("tr")) {
    
    td_ = list()
    for (td in tr %>% html_elements("td")){
        val <- td %>% html_text2()
        td_ <- append(td_, val)
    }
    df <- rbind(df, td_)
}
colnames(df) <- columns

# Or even more simply
#df <- table %>% html_table()
```
:::

The code produces the following dataframe.

|    |   # | Country (or dependency)   | Population (2023)   | Yearly Change   | Net Change   |   Density (P/Km²) | Land Area (Km²)   | Migrants (net)   |   Fert. Rate |   Med. Age | Urban Pop %   | World Share   |
|---:|----:|:--------------------------|:--------------------|:----------------|:-------------|------------------:|:------------------|:-----------------|-------------:|-----------:|:--------------|:--------------|
|  0 |   1 | India                     | 1,428,627,663       | 0.81 %          | 11,454,490   |               481 | 2,973,190         | -486,136         |          2   |         28 | 36 %          | 17.76 %       |
|  1 |   2 | China                     | 1,425,671,352       | -0.02 %         | -215,985     |               152 | 9,388,211         | -310,220         |          1.2 |         39 | 65 %          | 17.72 %       |
|  2 |   3 | United States             | 339,996,563         | 0.50 %          | 1,706,706    |                37 | 9,147,420         | 999,700          |          1.7 |         38 | 83 %          | 4.23 %        |
|  3 |   4 | Indonesia                 | 277,534,122         | 0.74 %          | 2,032,783    |               153 | 1,811,570         | -49,997          |          2.1 |         30 | 59 %          | 3.45 %        |
|  4 |   5 | Pakistan                  | 240,485,658         | 1.98 %          | 4,660,796    |               312 | 770,880           | -165,988         |          3.3 |         21 | 35 %          | 2.99 %        |

Some processing is needed but we already know how to do that.

Try scraping websites. The best way to learn is by practice!
