# Lecture 4 (Exploratory Data Analysis)

### Resources

- [P4DA](https://wesmckinney.com/book/): chapter 13
- [R4DS](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/index.html): chapter 7 
- [Youtube Video ~40 min](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xi0vhXFPegw&t=951s)

## Summary

So far in the course, we have gone through the machineary and basic tools to
transform data and generate graphs. We are now ready dive into the topic of
Exploratory Data Analyis (EDA).   

EDA is the process of systematically generating an understanding of the data
using the tools we have studied. That is, transforming and visualising data. We
have already, unknowingly, performed EDA, for instance, when we use the function
`head`, it gives us a quick glance of the structure of the data. By using
`head`, we have answered the question: *what is the structure of the data?*

Asking questions is key to EDA. That is how we unwrap the complexity of the
data, by asking and answering questions.

> There are no routine statistical questions, only questionable statistical
> routines.” 
>
> — Sir David Cox

*(quote borrowed from [R4DS](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/index.html)*

All questions of the data will lead to some deeper understanding of the data.
What are questions that we can ask (and answer) to fill out the gaps of
knowledge we have about the data? That ofcourse, depends on the data we are
working with. Therefore, performing EDA is not a strict framework, rather a
research methodology based on curiosity. E.g, *can one of the variables explain
the other? Why or why not?*. Answering these type of questions will give us a
deep insight into the data. We will not be able to answer all questions but
knowing what type of questions those are, will give us insight into the limits
of our dataset.

The process of EDA is iterative. Once a set of questions have been answered, new
questions will arise. This continues until there are no more questions to ask or
until you are satisfied with the understanding you have gained. You will get
better and more efficient at posing questions with practice. So, **practice X
3**.

Look at the resources above for examples of EDA.

