# Re-Exam MT4007 Feb 16, 2024

**READ THE [Overview](#overview) BEFORE BEGINING**

## Overview 

The exam should be handed in just as you have done during the homework. Create a
sub-directory in your github repository and name it exam. To complete the exam
the code and the final `.md` file should be uploaded to your repo. Finally, an
issue should be raised when you hand in, no later than **19.00**. You will
automatically fail if you hand in later than that. Make sure that your answers
are short and concise.

All the data required for the exam can be found in the [data
repo](https://github.com/mt4007-ht23/data) under the sub-directory *exam_data*.

### Permitted Tools

You are **NOT** allowed to collaborate with others.

All the packages taught in the course are permitted. If you use exotic packages
you might need to explain the methods you have used orally. 

Tools such as Chat-GPT are allowed as long as you understand what has been used.
Copy-pasting things that you do not understand is **NOT** allowed. Be careful
using Chat-GPT in the theoretical part, it provides faulty answers on these
questions. 

If I suspect that you have blatantly copied answers from the internet without
understanding, you will have to perform an oral exam.

### Help

I will be available on [Zoom](https://stockholmuniversity.zoom.us/j/6254185246) for questions during the following times:
- 14.30-15.00
- 16.30-17.00 

Besides these times you can reach me via email.

### Grading

To pass the exam you need at least 5 points in the theoretical part and 10
points in practical part. Otherwise that the grading is as follows:

| Grade  | F  | E  | D  | C  | B  | A  |
|--------|----|----|----|----|----|----|
| Points | 0-14 | 15-17 | 18-20 | 21-23 | 24-26 | 27-30 |

## Theoretical Part

### 1. SQL (5p)

Imagine a database containing a table `Products` with columns `ProductId`,
`Name`, `Price` `Category`. Write an SQL query to calculate the average grade
for each product category. Explain each part of your query thoroughly.

### 2. REST APIs (5p)

How is a typical REST request structured? Provide an example of a request
to a server for user authentication (Log in). Explain each part of the request. 

## Practical Part

In this part you will be tested on the practical tools you have learnt in this
course. You will be asked to analyse, wrangle and visualise data. Note that the
requested figures do **NOT** have to be exactly match. 

If data entry errors(missing-values, duplicates and so on) arise you can remove
them from the data unless the question specifically ask for you to deal with
them. Make sure to explain what you have done.

### 3. COVID-19 (10p)

Your task is to study the mortality rate of COVID-19 in the world. In this
scenario we do not have access to data so we need to turn to internet to find
the relevant data.

- Make a GET request to the following API
  `https://mt4007-ht23.github.io/data/covid.json`. Which contains COVID-19 data
  for 2022. The data is in JSON format. Generate the following table. (3p)

*If you are unable to get the data using REST, visit the link and copy the
data manually into a `.json` file.*

| country-iso | confirmed | deaths |
|-------------|-----------|--------|
| AFG         | 208324    | 7872   |
| AGO         | 105184    | 1931   |
| ALB         | 334135    | 3596   |
| AND         | 47820     | 165    |
| ARE         | 1049024   | 2348   |


- To make a meaningful analysis we need population data across the world.
  Webscrape the following
  [link](https://www.populationu.com/gen/population-by-country) for population
  data. The year 2022 is enough. Furthermore, generate a similar table as below. (4p)

  *If you are unable to webscrape the data, you can find the file
  `population-2022.csv` containing the same data.*

| Country Name | Country Code | 2022     |
|--------------|--------------|----------|
| Aruba        | ABW          | 107697   |
| Afghanistan  | AFG          | 40683694 |
| Angola       | AGO          | 34907095 |
| Albania      | ALB          | 2812325  |
| Andorra      | AND          | 77469    |

- Visualise the total number of cases per 100 000
  inhabitant and per country. Choose a suitable plot. (3p)

### 4. Data Storage (10p)

We now need to store the data we have retrieved in the previous assignment. For
this assignment, you should complete each subtask using only SQL. 

- Create *3* tables, `COUNTRY-ISO-MAP, `COVID-CASES`, `POPULATION-DATA`. Choose
  suitable variables for each table and link them in a reasonable way. (4p)

- Populate the tables with the data. (2p)

- Retrieve data using SQL and generate a plot that illustrates the effect of
  covid in each country. (4p)



