# Homework 1

In this assignment you will put initialize a github repo in the coure github
page where you will put all future assignments in. Furthermore, you will create
your first project and `push` it to github. In github terms, push means
uploading. All future homework will be reported on Markdown, which is a simple
markup language. It will make it easy for you to write and present work on
github since github has a builtin Markdown parser. I don't expect you to
understand everything that is stated here. You will come to understand every
term once you have completed assignment assignment.

## Assigment
To begin with you can start of with creating a repository on the github
organisation. If you haven't been invited to the organisation, then you probably
have to register on Moodle before going further. If you have been invited, go to
the [github page for the course](https://github.com/mt4007-ht23/). Now, go to
the repositories tab, and click on the `New Repository` button. The repository
name should be `githubusername_HW`, make sure that the name of your repository
matches that exactly, make it public or private depending on if you want others
to see your work or not. Now you can clone the repository to on your github desktop.
Grab the URL to your repository. 

On github desktop, add a new repository. To do this on the left press on the
repository drop-down and press add. Then press clone repository. Go to the url
tab and paste in the repository url. You can now start adding files to your
homework. To begin with add create a folder named homework1 and in it create a
file called README.md. In the README.md add the following markdown text

```md
# Homework 1
## About me
My name is ... I do this and that and i expect to learn this on this course...

```
Make sure to fill in your information. Now that you have changed your readme
github desktop should detect this change. Now it is time to upload the changes
to your github. To do this, commit the changes by adding a summary and
description. Make it short but informative. One the changes have been commited
you can push it to your github page. Press push on the top. You will now see
that the changes are reflected on your github page. On under homework1 you will
see your compiled markdown text. Github automatically looks in your project to
see if there is a `README.md` file and compiles it.

Finally, we want to combine all of this with Jupyter. Start up Jupyter-lab and
create a new notebook, the notebook should reflekt the language you are using.
in Jupyter create a new markdown cell. Write some markdown text and under
file>export>markdown will create a md file which you can see reflects your what
you have written in the cells. Now stage this change on github desktop and push
it to your repo. To finish up on check that the changes can be seen on Github.
Create an issue by going to the issues tab and pressing on create and issue. Let
the topic be homework 1 done. You are now done!

## Peer Review
Now that you are done, you will be assigned someone to review. Make a comment on
their issue and close and check for these things
- have they done everything
- is something wrong?
- tell them about some improvements they can make

Finally close the issue.

